Desktop e-book: Chapter 6 (#17305)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/modernize-desktop/deploying-modern-desktop-applications.md

---
title: Deploying Modern Desktop Applications
description: Everything you need to know about deploying for modern desktop applications.
ms.date: 09/16/2019
---

# Deploying Modern Desktop Applications

## Introduction

> When you develop desktop applications, besides other development aspects, you
> also have to think about how your application is going to be packaged and
> deployed to the final users' machines. The problem with packaging, deployment,
> and installation is that it usually falls under the umbrella of the IT
> professionals who care about different things than developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you develop desktop applications, one thing to consider is
how your application is going to be packaged and deployed to the 
users' machines. The problem with packaging, deployment,
and installation is that it usually falls under the umbrella of the IT
professionals, who care about different things than developers.
```

> These days we are all familiar with the DevOps concept where developers and IT
> pros work closely to move applications to their production environments. But if
> you have been in the desktop battle for more than 10 years you might have witnessed a following tory. A team of developers works together hard to meet the
> project deadlines. Business people are nervous since they need the system working
> on numerous user's machines to run the company. On the "D-Day", the
> project manager checks with every developer that their code is working well,
> everything is fine, they can ship. Then the package team comes in generating the
> setup for the app, distribute it to every user machine and a set of
> test users run the application. Well, they try, because before showing any UI
> the application throws an exception that says "Method ~ of object ~ failed".
> Panic starts flowing through the air and a brief investigation points to a young
> and tired developer that has introduced a third-party control, that certainly "worked on the dev machine".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These days, we're all familiar with the DevOps concept, where developers and IT
Pros work closely to move applications to their production environments. But if
you've been in the desktop battle for more than 10 years, you might have seen the following story. A team of developers works together hard to meet the
project deadlines. Business people are nervous since they need the system working
on many user's machines to run the company. On "D-Day", the
project manager checks with every developer that their code is working well and that everything is fine, so they can ship. Then, the package team comes in generating the
setup for the app, distribute it to every user machine and a set of
test users run the application. Well, they try, because before showing any UI,
the application throws an exception that says "Method ~ of object ~ failed".
Panic starts flowing through the air and a brief investigation points to a young
and tired developer that has introduced a third-party control, that certainly "worked on the dev machine".
```

> 

Reviewer: The use of D-Day on the previous paragraph makes me a bit nervous. I'd avoid using in our content and would replace it with "release day" or something.

> Installing desktop applications have traditionally been of  a nightmare for
> two main reasons: a lack of culture of close collaboration between dev and IT
> teams and a lack of a solid packaging a deploying technology we can build upon.
> In fact, we have been leaving with the fact that sometimes you regret to install
> an app because it ends up having some undesired side effects and some already
> installed applications stop working. Moreover, you cannot just restore the
> system to its original state by uninstalling. We are so used to live this
> situation that we have coined terms like "DLL Hell" or "Winrot".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing desktop applications have traditionally been a nightmare for
two main reasons: 

- Lack of close collaboration culture between dev and IT teams.
- Lack of a solid packaging and deploying technology we can build upon.

In fact, we've been living with the fact that sometimes you regret that you installed
an app because:

- It ends up having some undesired side effects on your machine.
- Some applications that were previously installed stop working. 

Additionally, you can't just restore the system to its original state by uninstalling the app. We're so used to live this situation that we've coined terms like "DLL Hell" or "Winrot".
```

> In this chapter, we talk about MSIX the brand-new technology from Microsoft that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we'll talk about MSIX. MSIX is the brand-new technology from Microsoft that
```

tries to capture the best of previous technologies to provide a solid foundation

> for the packaging technology of the future.

Reviewer: This paragraph sounds a lot like marketing spiel

> What does a packaging technology have to do with modernization? Well, it turns
> out that packaging is fundamental for the enterprise IT with lots of money
> invested there. Modernization is not only related with using the latest
> technologies but also with reducing time to market between a business
> requirement is defined and the moment your company delivers the feature to your
> client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What does a packaging technology have to do with modernization? Well, it turns
out that packaging is fundamental for the enterprise IT with lots of money
invested there. Modernization isn't only related to using the latest
technologies. It's also related to reducing time to market from the moment a business
requirement is defined until your company delivers the feature to your
client.
```

## The modern application lifecycle

> Today, developers write and build the code for an app and then pass the
> generated assets to the IT pros who reconfigure the app and repackage it
> typically in an MSI or more recent App-V packaging format, which is deployed
> through different channels and tools. One of the main problems with this
> approach is commonly known as "packaging paralysis". The problem is that this
> cycle repeats every time there is an App update or an OS Update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, developers write and build the code for an app and then pass the
generated assets to the IT Pros. Then, the IT Pros reconfigure the app and repackage it,
typically in an MSI or more recently in an App-V packaging format. The app is then deployed
through different channels and tools. One of the main problems with this
approach is commonly known as "packaging paralysis". The problem is that this
cycle repeats every time there's an app update or an OS update.
```

> We can see the process reflected on this picture:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the process reflected on the following picture:
```

> ![Modern IT](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\modern-it.png)

Reviewer: Image name is a bit too short

```suggestion
![Diagram showing the modern IT lifecyle](./media/deploying-modern-desktop-applications/modern-it-application-lifecycle.png)
```

> Companies need a way to break in this packaging cycle three independent cycles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Companies need a way to break this packaging cycle into three independent cycles:
```

> * OS Updates
> * Application Updates
> * Customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* OS updates
* Application updates
* Customization
```

> ![IT cycles](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\it-cycles.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing the modern IT virtuous cycles](./media/deploying-modern-desktop-applications/modern-it-virtuous-cycles.png)
```

> This means we should be able to update the underlying OS without having to
> repackage our apps or enable customizations from IT without the need to
> repackage the original developer package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous diagram shows that you can:

- Update the underlying OS without having to repackage your apps.
- Enable customizations from IT without the need to repackage the original developer package.
```

> This radical change leads us to the new and modern IT lifecycle depicted in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This radical change leads us to the new and modern IT lifecycle as shown in the
```

following picture:

> ![Microsoft IT tools](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\microsoft-it-tools.png)

Reviewer: Can you expand the alt text for someone who is blind?

> Developers create the app and generate an MSIX package that IT pros can consume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers create the app and generate an MSIX package that IT Pros can consume
```

and configure without the need of repackaging. Along with the MSIX technology,
Microsoft has created tools to allow IT to customize and configure packages
without repackaging.

## MSIX: The next generation of deployment

> Before MSIX, we had several packaging technologies available like setup wizards,
> MSI, ClickOnce, App-V, and scripting. Each of  technologies has their strengths and
> Microsoft has decided to pick the best of all to build MSIX. Therefore, MSIX is
> built on the foundations of these existing technologies picking the best of
> each:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before MSIX, there were several packaging technologies available like setup wizards,
MSI, ClickOnce, App-V, and scripting. Each of these technologies has their own strengths and
Microsoft has decided to pick the best of all to build MSIX. MSIX is
built on the foundations of these existing technologies picking the best of
each:
```

* App-V =\> Containerization
* ClickOnce =\> Auto updating
* MSI =\> Easy to distribute

> With MSIX, we get one installer technology with all these features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With MSIX, you get one installer technology with all these features.
```

> ![MSIX](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\msix.png)

Reviewer: Please review my suggestion here. Not sure if that's what you were trying to show here. You should also make the image name longer.

```suggestion
![Diagram showing the different technologies that had an impact on building MSIX](./media/deploying-modern-desktop-applications/msix.png)
```

### Benefits of MSIX

> #### Never regret installing an App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Never regret installing an app
```

MSIX provides a predictable, reliable, and safe deployment. The declarative
method contained in the package manifest lets the OS keep track of every asset
your application needs. It also provides a true clean uninstall with no side
effects.

#### Disk space optimization

> MSIX is optimized to reduce the footprint and application has on the user's
> machine disk space. It creates a single instance storage of your files, meaning
> that if you have two different packages with the same DLL, it is not installed
> twice. The platform takes care of that because it knows all the files that are
> installed by a particular app thanks to its declarative nature. It also allows
> you to have different versions of a DLL working side by side.

Reviewer: Please review my suggestion carefully.

```suggestion
MSIX is optimized to reduce the footprint that an application has on the user's
machine disk space. It creates a single instance storage of your files. That is, 
if you have two different packages with the same DLL, the DLL isn't installed
twice. The platform takes care of that problem because it knows all the files that
a particular app installed thanks to its declarative nature. It also allows
you to have different versions of a DLL working side by side.
```

> 

Reviewer: but given that a DLL is not installed twice, if an app didn't install the DLL because it was already installed by another app, wouldn't make more sense to say that the platform knows which DLLs an app needs vs what it has installed?

> With the use of Resource packages, you can easily create Multilingual apps and
> the OS takes care of installing the ones that are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the use of resource packages, you can easily create multilingual apps and
the OS takes care of installing the ones that are used.
```

#### Network optimization

MSIX detects the differences on the files at the byte block level enabling a

> feature called Differential Updates. What this means it that only the updated

Reviewer: You could introduce new terms with a different style perhaps instead of using capitallization?

```suggestion
feature called differential updates. What this means it that only the updated
```

byte blocks are downloaded on application updates.

> ![MSIX managing updates](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\msix-managing-updates.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![A diagram that shows how MSIX manages differential updates](./media/deploying-modern-desktop-applications/msix-managing-updates.png)
```

> With Streaming installation, the user can start working on your application
> quickly while other parts of the app are downloaded on the background.
> This feature contributes to an engaging experience for your users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With streaming installation, the user can quickly start working on your application
while other parts of the app are downloaded on the background.
This feature contributes to an engaging experience for your users.
```

> Through optional packages feature you achieve componentization on your app

Reviewer: This doesn't read well. Maybe

```suggestion
With the optional packages feature, you achieve componentization on your app
```

deployment, so you can download them when needed.

#### Simple packaging and deployment

> The AppManifest declares the versioning, device targeting and identify in a

Reviewer: was identify supposed to be identity here?

standard way for every application. It also provides a way to sign your assets
providing a solid security foundation.

> #### OS Managed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### OS managed
```

> The OS handles all the processes for installation, updating and removing an
> application. Applications are installed per user but downloaded only once,
> minimizing the disk footprint. Microsoft is working on providing the MSIX
> experience also on Windows 7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OS handles all the processes for installing, updating, and removing an
application. Applications are installed per user but downloaded only once,
minimizing the disk footprint. Microsoft is working on providing the MSIX
experience also on Windows 7.
```

#### Windows provides integrity for the app

> With the use of digital signatures, you can guarantee that you don't install
> application from untrusted sources. MSIX also prevents tampering because it
> keeps a record of file hashes and detects on file has been modified after
> installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the use of digital signatures, you can guarantee that you don't install an
application from untrusted sources. MSIX also prevents tampering because:

- It keeps a record of file hashes.
- It detects if a file has been modified after installation.
```

#### Works for the entire App Catalog

One of the coolest things about MSIX is that it works for the entire application
catalog, Windows Forms, WPF, MFC/ATL, Delphi, even if you want to do xCopy
deployment, ClickOnce, or going to the Store, you can use the same MSIX package.

### Tools

#### Windows Application Packaging Project

You can use the **Windows Application Packaging Project** project in Visual
Studio to generate a package for your desktop app. Then, you can publish that
package to the Microsoft Store or sideload it onto one or more PCs.

#### MSIX Packaging Tool

The MSIX Packaging Tool enables you to repackage your existing Win32
applications to the MSIX format. It offers both an interactive UI and a command
line for conversions and gives you the ability to convert an application without
having the source code.

![MSIX Packaging Tool](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\msix-packaging-tool.png)

#### Package Support Framework

The Package Support Framework is an open-source kit that helps you apply fixes

> to your existing win32 application when you don't have access to the source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to your existing Win32 application when you don't have access to the source
```

code, so that it can run in an MSIX container. The Package Support Framework
helps your application follow the best practices of the modern runtime
environment.

#### App Installer

> App Installer allows for Windows 10 apps to be installed by double-clicking the
> app package. This means that users don't need to use PowerShell or other
> developer tools to deploy Windows 10 apps. The App Installer can also install an
> app from the web, optional packages, and related sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App Installer allows Windows 10 apps to be installed by double-clicking the
app package. This means that users don't need to use PowerShell or other
developer tools to deploy Windows 10 apps. The App Installer can also install an
app from the web, optional packages, and related sets.
```

## How to create an MSIX package from an existing Win32 desktop application

> Let's see the steps you have to take to create an MSIX package from an existing
> Win32 application, a Windows Forms app in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's go through the process to create an MSIX package from an existing
Win32 application. In this example, we'll use a Windows Forms app.
```

> 

Reviewer: I guess this is skipping the step of opening your existing WinForms project in Visual Studio first. 
Also, the steps should be reviewed to show exactly where customers need to click or what they need to select.

1. Open your existing WinForms project in Visual Studio.
2. In Solution Explorer, right click on the solution node and select **Add** > **New Project**. The **Add New Project** dialog opens.
3. ...

And so on...

You will see the structure of the packaging project and note a special folder
called Applications. Inside this folder you can specify which applications you want to include in the package, it can be more than one.

![The structure of the packaging project](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\packaging-project.png)

Right-click on the *Applications* folder and select the Windows Forms project we
want to package from the Visual Studio solution.

![Adding our Windows Forms project to Packaging Project](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\adding-our-project.png)

At this point, you can compile and generate the package but let us take a look
at a couple of things. To have a better user experience, Visual Studio can auto
generate all the visual assets a modern application needs to handle icons and
tile assets for the tile bar and start menu. Opening the `Package.appxmanifest`
file you can access the Manifest Designer and generate all the visual assets
from a given image present on your project just by clicking *Create*.

![Manifest Designer](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\manifest-designer.png)

> If you open the code for the, Package.appxmanifest` you can see a couple of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you open the code for the *Package.appxmanifest* file, you can see a couple of
```

```xml
<a href="ms-appinstaller:?source=http://mywebservice.azureedge.net/MyApp.msix">Install app package </a>
```

This protocol work on all browsers and launches the installation process with a
great user experience on Windows 10. Since the OS manages the installation
process, it is aware of the location this application was installed from and
tracks all the files affected by the process.

MSIX builds a user interface for installation automatically showing some
properties of the package. Developers don't need to create this. This allows for
a common installation experience for every app.

![User interface for installation](media\deploying-modern-desktop-applications\ui-installation.png)

When you have a new version of your app, you want to deploy it to your users.
Once you have generated the new MSIX package and moved it to the deployment
server, you just have to edit the `.appinstaller` file to reflect this changes,
mainly the version, and the path to the new MSIX file. The next time the user
launches the application the system is going to detect the change and download
the files for the new version in the background. When this is done, installation

> will execute on new application launch transparently for your user.

Reviewer: Missing previous button
